Frequently Asked Questions
==========================

How to compile my own C++ code that uses Essentia?
--------------------------------------------------


Here is an example how to compile [standard_mfcc.cpp](https://github.com/MTG/essentia/blob/2.0.1/src/examples/standard_mfcc.cpp) example on Linux linking with a system-wide installation of Essentia (done by ```./waf install```) and all its dependencies. Modify to your needs. 

```
g++ -pipe -Wall -O2 -fPIC -I/usr/local/include/essentia/ -I/usr/local/include/essentia/scheduler/ -I/usr/local/include/essentia/streaming/  -I/usr/local/include/essentia/utils -I/usr/include/taglib -I/usr/local/include/gaia2 -I/usr/include/qt4 -I/usr/include/qt4/QtCore -D__STDC_CONSTANT_MACROS standard_mfcc.cpp -o standard_mfcc -L/usr/local/lib -lessentia -lfftw3 -lyaml -lavcodec -lavformat -lavutil -lsamplerate -ltag -lfftw3f -lQtCore -lgaia2
```

Alternatively, if you want to create and build your own examples, the easiest way is to add them to ```src/examples``` folder, modify ```src/examples/wscript``` file accordingly and use ```./waf configure --with-examples; ./waf``` to build them.

You can build your application using XCode (OSX) following [these steps](https://github.com/MTG/essentia/issues/58#issuecomment-38530548).


OSX static builds and templates (JUCE/VST and openFrameworks)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here you can find portable 32-bit static builds of the Essentia C++ library and its dependencies for OSX (thanks to Cárthach from GiantSteps) as well as templates for JUCE/VST and openFrameworks:

https://github.com/GiantSteps/Essentia-Libraries 



Linux static builds
-------------------

To create static build of the library and executable example extractors:

Prepare static build of Libav 0.8.16:
```
git clone git://git.libav.org/libav.git
cd libav
git checkout tags/v0.8.16
./configure --disable-doc --disable-ffmpeg --disable-avconv --disable-avplay --disable-avprobe --disable-avserver --disable-avdevice  --disable-swscale --disable-avfilter --disable-network --disable-indevs --disable-outdevs
make
sudo make install
``` 

Prepare static build of Taglib 1.9.1:
  
```
wget http://taglib.github.io/releases/taglib-1.9.1.tar.gz
tar xf taglib-1.9.1.tar.gz
cd taglib-1.9.1
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr/local -DCMAKE_RELEASE_TYPE=Release -DENABLE_STATIC=ON
make
sudo make install
```
Make sure you did not have libtag1-dev package installed via apt-get (if so, uninstall it).


Build Essentia:
```
./waf configure  --with-static-examples
./waf
sudo ./waf install
```

The static executables will be in the ```build/src/examples``` folder.


Cross-compiling for Windows on Linux
------------------------------------

Install mingw gcc/g++
```
sudo apt-get install gcc-mingw32 
```

Build dependencies
```
cd packaging/win32_3rdparty
build_libav_nomuxers.sh
build_taglib.sh
build_fftw3.sh
build_libsamplerate.sh
build_yaml.sh
cd ../../
```

Build Essentia
```
./waf configre --with-examples --cross-compile-mingw32
./waf
```

Running tests
-------------
In the case you want to assure correct working of Essentia, do the tests.

The most important test is the basetest, it should never fail: 
```
./build/basetest
```

Run all python tests: 
```
./waf run_python_tests
```
    
Run all tests except specific ones:
```
python test/src/unittest/all_tests.py -audioloader_streaming
```

Run a specific test
```
python test/src/unittest/all_tests.py audioloader_streaming
```


How to know which other Algorithms an Algorithm uses?
-----------------------------------------------------

The most obvious answer is: by reading its code. However, it is also possible to generate such a list automatically. 

Running the python script ```src/examples/python/show_algo_dependencies.py``` will output a list of all intermediate Algorithms created within each Algorithm in Essentia. It utilizes the logging framework and watches for messages generated by AlgorithmFactory at the moment of running ```create()``` method for each internal algorithm.  

Note, that you cannot be sure this list of dependencies is 100% correct as the script simply instantiates each algorithm to test for its dependencies, but does not run the ```compute``` stage. It is up to developers conscience to keep instantiations in a correct place, and if an Algorithm is being created on the ```compute``` stage, it will be unnoticed.


Training and running classifier models in Gaia
----------------------------------------------
In order to run classification in Essentia you need to prepare a classifier model in Gaia and run GaiaTransform algorithm configured to use this model. The example of using high-level models can be seen in the code of ```streaming_music_extractor```. Here we discuss the steps to be followed to train classifier models that can be used with this extractor.

1. Compute music descriptors using ```streaming_music_extractor``` for all audio files.
2. Install Gaia with python bindings.
3. Prepare json [groundtruth](https://github.com/MTG/gaia/blob/master/src/bindings/pygaia/scripts/classification/groundtruth_example.yaml) and [filelist](https://github.com/MTG/gaia/blob/master/src/bindings/pygaia/scripts/classification/filelist_example.yaml) files (see examples).
    - Groundtruth file maps identifiers for audio files (they can be paths to audio files or whatever id strings you want to use) to class labels. 
    - Filelist file maps these identifiers to the actual paths to the descriptor files for each audio track. 
4. Currently Gaia does not support loading descriptors in json format, as a workaround you can configure the extractor output to yaml format in Step 1, or run ```json_to_sig.py``` [conversion script](https://github.com/MTG/gaia/blob/master/src/bindings/pygaia/scripts/classification/json_to_sig.py).  
5. Run ```train_model.py``` script in Gaia ([here](https://github.com/MTG/gaia/blob/master/src/bindings/pygaia/scripts/classification/train_model.py)) with these groundtruth and filelist files. The script will create the classifier model file. 
6. The model file can now be used by a GaiaTransform algorithm inside ```streaming_music_extractor```. 

Note that using a specific classifier model implies that you are expected to give a pool with the same descriptor layout as the one used in training as an input to GaiaTransform Algorithm. 

Builing lightweight Essentia with reduced dependencies 
-----------------------------------------------------
Since version 2.1, build scripts can be configured to ignore 3rdparty dependencies required by Essentia in order to create a striped-down version of the library.  Use  ```./waf configure``` command with the ```--lightweight``` flag to provide the list of 3rdparty dependencies to be included. For example, the command below will configure to build Essentia avoiding all dependecies except fftw:
```
./waf configure --lightweight=fftw
```

Avoid all dependencies including fftw and build with KissFFT instead (BSD, included in Essentia therefore no external linking needed, cross-platform):

```
./waf configure --lightweight= --fft=KISS
```

Avoid all dependencies and build with Accelerate FFT (native on OSX/iOS):

```
./waf configure --lightweight= --fft=ACCELERATE
```

It is also possible to specify algorithms to be ignored using the ```--ignore-algos``` flag, although you need to take care that the ignored algorithm are not required by any of the algorithms and examples that will be compiled. 

Note, that Essentia includes in its code the Spline library (LGPLv3) which is used by Spline and CubicSpline algorithms and is built by default. To ignore this library, use the following flag in ```./waf configure``` command:
```
--ignore-algos=Spline,CubicSpline
```

For more details on the build flags, run:
```
./waf --help
```





